---
title: Research in Academia vs Industry
date: 3/25/2018
---

It's late March and I'm running out of time to choose a graduate program. Applications were due in December, "interviews" were done in February, and the deadline is April 15th. If I count time spent applying to a Fellowship in September and October, I've been thinking about graduate school for seven straight months. But now, in March -- after all that -- I'm trying to decide whether it's worth it.

I'm lucky to be choosing between three great schools: The University of Chicago, Princeton, and Yale. And, on the surface, graduate school makes sense. I like programming... I like research -- there will be plenty of both in graduate school. But my concern is that I'll do eight or more years of concerted research, including postdocs, only to wind up in a position I didn't need a PhD to get to. If I become a computational biologist, building tools to help biologists and find trends in medical data, is that any different from what I'm already doing? If I become an inference-focused [data scientist](https://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/04/28/less-noise-but-more-money-in-data-science/) on the other side, would the marginal benefit of graduate school outweight its marginal cost?

There are undeniable perks to getting a PhD. Working and networking with graduate students, learning under professors that are experts, and doing the kind of foundational research that only happens in academia. But [books](https://www.amazon.com/Getting-What-You-Came-Students/dp/0374524777) on the graduate process stress that understanding why you're getting the PhD is critical. For me, my working heuristic for program evaluation (subject to change daily) is: to what degree does it confer skills that are difficult or impossible to self-teach -- either because they're too novel to study or would take too many years to learn. A strong secondary priority is presence and emphasis on research with industry application; tenure positions are [rare](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/14/upshot/so-many-research-scientists-so-few-openings-as-professors.html) and startups are fun.

But making the decision has been difficult. I'm working with a sparse data set: I have no more information than impressions made during the interview weekends and a list of alumni to cross reference in LinkedIn. So get a better sense of how to compare programs, I decided to look closer at the research going on in academia and industry. I wanted to know whether there're research trends in the ivory tower that don't translate to academia or visa versa.
